= Install Funtoo Linux on a Raspberry Pi =

== Introduction ==
This is the updated quick and dirty HOWTO covering the automation of cross-compiling, kernel building, emulation and booting of arbitrary architectures, but specifically focused on the cross compiling the Raspeberry Pi linux kernel sources for target arm-linux-gnueabihf and booting it on Raspberry Pi boards with a funtoo stage 3. It's so quick and dirty you probably won't be able replicate the results here on your first try. But it is possible!

This is an update of [[Crossdev_Automation]], reflecting the changes needed to accomodate the new kits structure of Funtoo, and to clean up the scripting used for automation. The document will remain available for reference purposes.
== Installation Overview ==
#[[Create Your Installation Settings]]
#[[Install the Stage 3 Tarball]]
#[[Install the Firmware]]
#[[Configure Your System]]
#[[Install Binary Kernel, Modules, and dtbs or Cross-Compile from Source]]
#[[Optionally Install Distcc via QEMU Chroot]]
#[[Partition and Format an SDCard]]
#[[Deploy Installation to SDCard]]


== Get the Bash Script ==

Development code is available on [https://github.com/d4g33z/sysroot.git github]. The structure of the file {{c|sysroot.sh}} should roughly correspond to the information contained here.

=== Create Your Installation Settings ===

Confguration your installation:

{{file|name=config.sh|lang=bash|desc=Set your install configuration variables|body=
KERNEL_WORK=/usr/src/rpi_kernel
RPI_KERN_BRANCH=rpi-4.14.y

SYSROOT_WORK=/usr/src/sysroots
STAGE_URL="http://ftp.osuosl.org/pub/funtoo/funtoo-current/arm-32bit/raspi3/stage3-latest.tar.xz"
CTARGET=armv7a-hardfloat-linux-gnueabi
CFLAGS="-O2 -pipe -march=armv7-a -mtune=cortex-a53 -mfpu=neon-vfpv4 -mfloat-abi=hard"

#SDCARD_DEV=mmcblk0p
SDCARD_DEV=sdb

#optional
DISTCC_REMOTE_JOBS=21
DISTCC_REMOTE_HOSTS="10.0.0.1,cpp,lzo"
}}



=== Install the Stage 3 Tarball ===

=== Install the Firmware ===
=== Configure Your System ===
=== Install Binary Kernel, Modules, and dtbs or Cross-Compile from Source ===
==== Retrieving Necessary Source Trees ====
==== Using a Local Overlay with Crossdev ====
{{Package|sys-devel/crossdev}} is a wonderful script for managing cross-compiling environments on Gentoo, but it is incompatible with Funtoo's improved gcc ebuilds. There is incomplete documentation of a pure Funtoo [https://bugs.funtoo.org/browse/FL-3787 solution], but there has been no follow up on a complete implementation.

A simple solution is to create a [[Local_Overlay|local overlay]] named "crossdev", store gentoo ebuilds and patches in it, and use a crossdev command line switch to direct it to search the overlay for the appropriate ebuilds. This has the advantage of isolating all gentoo files and resulting binaries in a single directory.~

Let's follow the directions from [[Local_Overlay]], and remove the .git subdirectory.~
{{console|body=
###i## mkdir /var/git/overlay
###i## cd /var/git/overlay
###i## git clone  https://github.com/funtoo/skeleton-overlay.git crossdev
###i## rm -rf /var/git/overlay/crossdev/.git
###i## echo "crossdev" > /var/git/overlay/crossdev/profiles/repo_name
}}

Edit config files to match.
{{file|name=/etc/portage/repos.conf/crossdev.conf|lang=|desc=Add the crossdev overlay to portage|body=
[crossdev]
location = /var/git/overlay/crossdev
auto-sync = no
priority = 10
}}

Let's make a [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/600079/how-do-i-clone-a-subdirectory-only-of-a-git-repository/28039894#28039894 sparse checkout] of the main Gentoo repo.

{{console|body=
###i## cd /var/git/overlay/crossdev
###i## git init
###i## git remote add origin git://github.com/gentoo/gentoo.git
###i## git config core.sparseCheckout true
###i## echo "sys-devel/gcc" >> .git/info/sparse-checkout
###i## git pull --depth=1 origin master
}}

Install crossdev.
{{console|body=
# echo "sys-devel/crossdev **" >> /etc/portage/package.keywords/crossdev
# echo "=sys-devel/crossdev-99999999" >> /etc/portage/package.unmask/crossdev
# emerge crossdev
}}


=== Optionally Install Distcc via QEMU Chroot ===
=== Partition and Format an SDCard ===
=== Deploy Installation to SDCard ===

